# Climate Adaptation QNMs

### Ocean Modeling Forum [Climate & Communities Working Group](https://oceanmodelingforum.org/working-groups/climate-and-communities/)


Adaptation to climate change can have trade-offs and unintended consequences that may add to, or amplify, climate impacts. Identifying how these unintended consequences arise in local contexts is an important step in climate adaptation planning, but the tools for doing so are still evolving. We demonstrate how social-ecological Qualitative Network Models (QNMs) can be used to explore the unintended consequences of climate adaptation in fisheries. Drawing on the dynamics of fishers’ participation in the U.S. West Coast Dungeness crab fishery, we simulate a harmful algal bloom (HAB) in a model fishing community and compare outcomes for human well-being, with and without climate adaptation. We consider a range of climate adaptations, from coping mechanisms to transformational adaptation, based on actions identified during participatory scenario planning initiatives. We first use QNMs to identify how common weaknesses or trade-offs arise across adaptation strategies, specifically highlighting persistent negative outcomes for cultural practices and community relationships in our model community. We then explore alternative configurations of model structure, by manipulating influential dynamics and feedback loops. In our QNMs, alternative fishing opportunity and in-season flexibility - specifically, fishers’ capacity to increase effort in alternative fisheries not affected by a HAB - greatly influenced outcomes from climate adaptation. This result points to the potential development of inequitable outcomes from climate adaptation based on community members’ capacity for in-season flexibility; if replicated in a real-world context, this would justify more tailored adaptation action and fine-scale monitoring. Based on this exercise, QNMs are a useful tool for climate adaptation planning because they can be used to explore common trade-offs across adaptation options; to explore common or disparate assumptions about influential dynamics; and to direct future research and monitoring priorities to help early identification of unequal outcomes.    